---
title: Stop (Ab)using Bootstrap / Foundation!
author: James Steinbach
layout: post.html
permalink: /css/stop-abusing-bootstrap-foundation/
categories:
  - CSS
  - Sass
---
<a title="Bootstrap" href="http://getbootstrap.com/" target="_blank">Bootstrap</a> and <a title="Foundation" href="http://foundation.zurb.com/" target="_blank">Foundation</a> are tools that get a new development project off the ground fast. I appreciate the need to work fast; I really do. But fast doesn&#8217;t end when you&#8217;re done wireframing a site&#8217;s macro layout. Fast is absolutely essential for every end user who uses your site after launch. And chances are, if you&#8217;re gaining speed by framing your sites with Bootstrap or Foundation, you&#8217;re cheating your users out of speed in real life. Performance is just one of several problems with HTML class-based layout. Let&#8217;s walk through the big issues here:

## Separation of Powers

Programming languages have strengths and weaknesses; some even have specific purposes. This is especially true with HTML & CSS. HTML serves to outline your content. Properly formatted HTML tells search engines & accessibility tools how your pages are structured and what content is most important. CSS, on the other hand, provides design / layout / style for that content. No one tries to write content in CSS (cough, cough, don&#8217;t abuse `content: 'My Content';` either!). So why are we so set on using HTML classes to control visual layout. That&#8217;s exactly what Bootstrap, Foundation, etc, do: they require you to use a very specific HTML class naming convention in order to render your site&#8217;s layout correctly. Yes, ultimately the margins and widths and floats are in CSS, but without HTML classes, these grid systems are worthless. To be honest, if we&#8217;re going to have to use a strict system of class names on an overly-complex HTML structure (real code from a project I recently inherited: `class="small-12 medium-10 medium-centered xlarge-8 columns intro"`), we might as well go back to table-based design and inline styles! (Because inline CSS is basically what all this `class="button button-blue button-large button-border"` nonsense amounts to.) When CSS replaced table-based design, the promise we developers believed was &#8220;Just change one stylesheet and your entire site layout can change!&#8221; (<a title="CSS Zen Garden" href="http://www.csszengarden.com/" target="_blank">CSS Zen Garden</a>, anyone?) Today class-based grid systems are trying to convince us to give that beauty up. Let&#8217;s all say it together, &#8220;HTML is markup language for structuring my page content; CSS is visual styling to determine how it looks. I will not confuse them with each other.&#8221;

## Maintainability

Back to the CSS Zen Garden ideal, I realize not every site redesign will be so drastic. But what if a &#8220;minor redesign&#8221; changes your sidebar from 33% to 25% of the width? I&#8217;m not interested in running find-replace on all my template files to change &#8220;fourcol&#8221; to &#8220;threecol&#8221; and &#8220;eightcol&#8221; to &#8220;ninecol,&#8221; all the while hoping it doesn&#8217;t unintentionally break something else! I want to go one place in my stylesheet, change those proportions, and smile. I&#8217;ve not done a huge survey or gathered data from hundreds of other devs, but in my own experience, it takes me about as much time to build a new site layout from scratch as it does to &#8220;minor layout changes&#8221; to a Bootstrap-based site. (One of these days I&#8217;ll demo <a title="Bourbon Neat" href="http://neat.bourbon.io/" target="_blank">Bourbon Neat</a> here and show you how fast my method is!) If you&#8217;re going to be doing long-term maintenance of a site or handing it off to another developer, think twice about the start-up speed boost that Bootstrap or Foundation give you and choose a solution that will be maintainable long-term.

## Performance & Bloat

Bootstrap and Foundation provide every grid layout style declaration possible on a 12-column system. However, I&#8217;ve never built a site that used every layout option possible. That means that 60% or so of the grid portion of those stylesheets is bloat. (I will give Foundation credit: they&#8217;ve got a <a title="Foundation - Configure Download" href="http://foundation.zurb.com/develop/download.html" target="_blank">config page</a> for downloading only the components you want, but that still doesn&#8217;t fix the grid bloat.) I&#8217;ve heard the answer to this argument: &#8220;It&#8217;s 2014: 1000 lines of CSS isn&#8217;t much more than 100 lines.&#8221; (Literally, I heard that this morning.) I&#8217;d reply, &#8220;It&#8217;s 2014, major search engines are prioritizing SERPs by page speed and mobile data-network traffic is constantly growing.&#8221; Choosing to ignore easy performance gains for &#8220;speed in development&#8221; simply isn&#8217;t a legitimate option.

## Concessions

I&#8217;ll concede a few points about using a framework like Bootstrap or Foundation: if you&#8217;re at an agency that requires a framework or passing work off to devs who use a framework, that&#8217;s a decent reason to use one. If you have a super-cheap client who needs a quick one-off site with no maintenance, that&#8217;s a reason, but not a good one. So, if you absolutely must use Bootstrap, Foundation, etc, here&#8217;s how:

## Clean Up Your Framework Output

If you&#8217;re only using 4, 6, 8, and 12 columns widths on your grid, delete the other rulesets. If you&#8217;re only using orange and blue buttons, delete the other rulesets. If you&#8217;re only using a dozen glyphs in the icon font, &#8230; you get the picture. If you&#8217;ve got a Node.js-, Grunt-, or Gulp-based workflow, <a title="Uncss" href="https://github.com/giakki/uncss" target="_blank">Uncss</a> will help automate this clean-up process. So stop (ab)using Bootstrap and Foundation. If possible, replace them with gridless HTML and all-CSS layout. If you must use them, clean out their bloat before you launch the site.
